THE CAPTAIN'S DAUGHTER. (Cut to 2 Chapters)


CHAPTER I.


THE SERGEANT OF THE GUARDS.


My father, Andrei Petrovitch Grineff, after having served in his
youth under Count Münich,[1] quitted the service, in the year 17--,
with the rank of senior major. He settled down upon his estate in the
district of Simbirsk, where he married Avdotia Vassilevna U----, the
daughter of a poor nobleman of the neighbourhood. Nine children were
the result of this marriage. All my brothers and sisters died in their
infancy. I was enrolled as a sergeant in the Semenovsky Regiment,
through the influence of Prince B----, a major in the Guards, and a
near relation of our family. I was considered as being on leave of
absence until the completion of my course of studies. In those days
our system of education was very different from that in vogue at the
present time. At five years of age I was given into the hands of our
gamekeeper, Savelitch, whose sober conduct had rendered him worthy of
being selected to take charge of me. Under his instruction, at the
age of twelve I could read and write Russian, and I was by no means a
bad judge of the qualities of a greyhound. About that time my father
engaged a Frenchman, a Monsieur Beaupré, who had been imported from
Moscow, together with the yearly stock of wine and Provence oil.
Savelitch was not by any means pleased at his arrival.

"Heaven be thanked!" he muttered to himself; "the child is washed,
combed, and well-fed. What need is there for spending money and
engaging a Mossoo, as if there were not enough of our own people!"

Beaupré had been a hairdresser in his own country, then a soldier in
Prussia, then he had come to Russia _pour être outchitel_,[2] without
very well understanding the meaning of the word. He was a good sort of
fellow, but extremely flighty and thoughtless. His chief weakness was
a passion for the fair sex; but his tenderness not unfrequently met
with rebuffs, which would cause him to sigh and lament for the whole
twenty-four hours. Moreover, to use his own expression, he was no enemy
of the bottle, or, in other words, he loved to drink more than was good
for him. But as, with us, wine was only served out at dinner, and then
in small glasses only, and as, moreover, the teacher was generally
passed over on these occasions, my Beaupré very soon became accustomed
to Russian drinks, and even began to prefer them to the wines of his
own country, as being more beneficial for the stomach. We soon became
very good friends, and although, by the terms of the contract, he was
engaged to teach me French, German, and all the sciences, yet he much
preferred learning from me to chatter in Russian, and then each of us
occupied himself with what seemed best to him. Our friendship was of
the most intimate character, and I wished for no other mentor. But fate
soon separated us, owing to an event which I will now proceed to relate.

The laundress, Palashka, a thick-set woman with a face scarred by
the small-pox, and the one-eyed cowkeeper, Akoulka, made up their
minds together one day and went and threw themselves at my mother's
feet, accusing themselves of certain guilty weaknesses, complaining,
with a flood of tears, that the Mossoo had taken advantage of their
inexperience, and had effected their ruin. My mother did not look upon
such matters in the light of a joke, so she consulted my father upon
the subject. An inquiry into the matter was promptly resolved upon.
He immediately sent for the rascally Frenchman. He was informed that
Monsieur was engaged in giving me my lesson. My father came to my room.
At that particular moment Beaupré was lying on the bed, sleeping the
sleep of innocence. I was occupied in a very different manner. I ought
to mention that a map had been obtained from Moscow, in order that I
might be instructed in geography. It hung upon the wall without ever
being made use of, and as it was a very large map, and the paper thick
and of good quality, I had long been tempted to appropriate it to my
own use. I resolved to make it into a kite, and, taking advantage of
Beaupré's slumber, I set to work. My father entered the room just at
the moment when I was adjusting a tail to the Cape of Good Hope. Seeing
me so occupied with geography, my father saluted me with a box on the
ear, then stepped towards Beaupré, and waking him very unceremoniously,
overwhelmed him with reproaches. In his confusion, Beaupré wanted to
rise up from the bed, but he was unable to do so: the unfortunate
Frenchman was hopelessly intoxicated. There was only one course to take
after so many acts of misdemeanour. My father seized hold of him by
the collar, lifted him off the bed, hustled him out of the room, and
dismissed him that very same day from his service--to the unspeakable
delight of Savelitch. Thus ended my education.

I now lived the life of a spoiled child, frightening the pigeons,
and playing at leap-frog with the boys on the estate. I continued to
lead this kind of life until I was sixteen years of age. Then came the
turning-point in my existence.

One day in autumn, my mother was boiling some honey preserves in
the parlour, and I was looking on and licking my lips as the liquid
simmered and frothed. My father was sitting near the window, reading
the "Court Calendar," which he received every year. This book always
had a great effect upon him; he used to read it with especial interest,
and the reading of it always stirred his bile in the most astonishing
manner. My mother, who was perfectly well acquainted with his whims and
peculiarities, always endeavoured to keep this unfortunate book out
of the way as much as she possibly could, and, on this account, his
eyes would not catch a glimpse of the volume for months together. But
when he did happen to find it, he would sit with it in his hands for
hours at a stretch.... As I have said, my father was reading the "Court
Calendar," every now and then shrugging his shoulders, and muttering
to himself: "Lieutenant-General!... He used to be a sergeant in my
company!... Knight of both Russian Orders!... How long is it since
we----"

At last my father flung the "Calendar" down upon the sofa, and sank
into a reverie--a proceeding that was always of evil augury.

Suddenly he turned to my mother:

"Avdotia Vassilevna,[3] how old is Petrousha?"[4]

"He is getting on for seventeen," replied my mother: "Petrousha was born
in the same year that aunt Nastasia Gerasimovna[5] lost her eye,
and----"

"Very well," said my father, interrupting her; "it is time that he
entered the service. He has had quite enough of running about the
servants' rooms and climbing up to the dovecots."

The thought of soon having to part with me produced such an effect
upon my mother, that she let the spoon fall into the saucepan, and the
tears streamed down her cheeks. As for myself, it would be difficult
to describe the delight that I felt. The thought of the service was
associated in my mind with thoughts of freedom and the pleasures of a
life in St. Petersburg. I imagined myself an officer in the Guards,
that being, in my opinion, the summit of human felicity.

My father loved neither to change his intentions, nor to delay putting
them into execution. The day for my departure was fixed. On the evening
before, my father informed me that he intended to write to my future
chief, and asked for pens and paper.

"Do not forget, Andrei Petrovitch,"[6] said my mother, "to send my
salutations to Prince B----, and say that I hope he will take our
Petrousha under his protection."

"What nonsense!" exclaimed my father, frowning. "Why should I write to
Prince B----"

"Why, you said just now that you wanted to write to Petrousha's chief."

"Well, and what then?"

"Why, Prince B---- is Petrousha's chief. You know Petrousha is enrolled
in the Semenovsky Regiment."

"Enrolled! What care I whether he is enrolled or not? Petrousha is
not going to St. Petersburg. What would he learn by serving in St.
Petersburg? To squander money and indulge in habits of dissipation. No,
let him enter a regiment of the Line; let him learn to carry knapsack
and belt, to smell powder, to become a soldier, and not an idler in the
Guards. Where is his passport? Bring it here."

My mother went to get my passport, which she preserved in a small
box along with the shirt in which I was christened, and delivered it
to my father with a trembling hand. My father read it through very
attentively, placed it in front of him upon the table, and commenced to
write his letter.

I was tortured with curiosity. Where was I to be sent to, if I was not
going to St. Petersburg? I kept my eyes steadfastly fixed upon the pen,
which moved slowly over the paper. At last he finished the letter,
enclosed it in a cover along with my passport, took off his spectacles,
and, calling me to him, said:

"Here is a letter for Andrei Karlovitch R----, my old comrade and
friend. You are going to Orenburg to serve under his command."

All my brilliant hopes were thus brought to the ground! Instead of a
life of gaiety in St. Petersburg, there awaited me a tedious existence
in a dreary and distant country. The service, which I had thought of
with such rapture but a moment before, now presented itself to my eyes
in the light of a great misfortune. But there was no help for it, and
arguing the matter would have been of no avail.

Early the next morning a travelling carriage drew up before the door;
my portmanteau was placed in it, as well as a small chest containing a
tea-service and a tied-up cloth full of rolls and pies--the last tokens
of home indulgence. My parents gave me their blessing. My father said
to me:

"Good-bye, Peter! Serve faithfully whom you have sworn to serve; obey
your superior officers; do not run after their favours; be not too
eager in volunteering for service, but never shirk a duty when you are
selected for it; and remember the proverb: 'Take care of your coat
while it is new, and of your honour while it is young.'"

My mother, with tears in her eyes, enjoined me to take care of my
health, at the same time impressing upon Savelitch to look well after
the child. A cloak made of hare-skin was then put over my shoulders,
and over that another made of fox-skin. I seated myself in the carriage
with Savelitch, and started off on my journey, weeping bitterly.

That same night I arrived at Simbirsk, where I was compelled to remain
for the space of twenty-four hours, to enable Savelitch to purchase
several necessary articles which he had been commissioned to procure. I
stopped at an inn. In the morning Savelitch sallied out to the shops.
Tired of looking out of the window into a dirty alley, I began to
wander about the rooms of the inn. As I entered the billiard-room, my
eyes caught sight of a tall gentleman of about thirty-five years of
age, with long, black moustaches; he was dressed in a morning-gown, and
had a cue in his hand and a pipe between his teeth. He was playing with
the marker, who drank a glass of brandy when he scored, but crept on
all-fours beneath the table when he failed. I stopped to look at the
game. The longer it continued, the more frequent became the crawling
on all-fours, until at last the marker crept beneath the table and
remained there.

The gentleman uttered a few strong expressions over him, as a sort
of funeral oration, and then invited me to play a game with him. I
declined, on the score that I did not know how to play. This evidently
seemed very strange to him, and he looked at me with an air of
commiseration. However, we soon fell into conversation. I learned that
his name was Ivan Ivanovitch Zourin; that he was a captain in a Hussar
regiment; that he was then stopping in Simbirsk, waiting to receive
some recruits, and that he was staying at the same inn as myself.

Zourin invited me to dine with him, in military fashion, upon whatever
Heaven should be pleased to set before us. I accepted his invitation
with pleasure. We sat down to table. Zourin drank a great deal, and
pressed me to do the same, saying that it was necessary for me to
get accustomed to the ways of the service. He related to me several
military anecdotes, which convulsed me with laughter, and when we rose
from the table we had become intimate friends Then he offered to teach
me how to play at billiards.

"It is an indispensable game for soldiers like us," said he. "When on
the march, for instance, you arrive at some insignificant village, what
can you do to occupy the time? You cannot always be thrashing the Jews.
You involuntarily make your way to the inn to play at billiards, and to
do that, you must know how to play."

I was completely convinced, and I commenced to learn the game with
great assiduity. Zourin encouraged me with loud-voiced praise, being
astonished at my rapid progress; and after a few lessons he proposed
that we should play for money, for the smallest sums possible, not for
the sake of gain, but merely for the sake of not playing for nothing,
which, according to his opinion, was an exceedingly bad habit.

I agreed to his proposal, and Zourin ordered a supply of punch, which
he persuaded me to partake of, saying that it was necessary to become
accustomed to it in the service; for what would the service be without
punch! I followed his advice. In the meantime we continued our game.
The more frequently I had recourse to the punch, the more emboldened
I became. The balls kept continually flying in the wrong direction;
I grew angry, abused the marker--who counted the points, Heaven only
knows how,--increased the stakes from time to time--in a word, I
behaved like a boy just out of leading-strings. In the meanwhile the
time had passed away without my having observed it. Zourin glanced at
the clock, laid down his cue, and informed me that I had lost a hundred
roubles.[7] I was considerably confounded by this piece of information.
My money was in the hands of Savelitch. I began to make some excuses.
Zourin interrupted me:

"Pray, do not be uneasy. I can wait; and now let us go to
Arinoushka."[8]

What more shall I add? I finished the day as foolishly as I had
commenced it. We took supper with Arinoushka. Zourin kept continually
filling my glass, observing as he did so, that it was necessary to
become accustomed to it in the service. When I rose from the table, I
was scarcely able to stand on my legs; at midnight, Zourin conducted me
back to the inn.

Savelitch came to the doorstep to meet us. He uttered a groan on
perceiving the indubitable signs of my zeal for the service.

"What has happened to you?" he said, in a voice of lamentation. "Where
have you been drinking so? Oh, Lord! never did such a misfortune happen
before!"

"Hold your tongue, you old greybeard!" I replied, in an unsteady voice;
"you are certainly drunk. Go to sleep ... and put me to bed."

The next morning I awoke with a violent headache, and with a confused
recollection of the events of the day before. My reflections were
interrupted by Savelitch, who brought me a cup of tea.

"You are beginning your games early, Peter Andreitch,"[9] he said,
shaking his head. "And whom do you take after? As far as I know,
neither your father nor grandfather were ever drunkards; as for your
mother, I will say nothing; she has never drunk anything except
_kvas_[10] since the day she was born. And who is to blame for all
this? Why, that cursed Mossoo, who was ever running to Antipevna with:
'_Madame_, _je vous prie, vodka_.'[11] You see what a pretty pass your
_je vous prie_ has brought you to! There's no denying that the son of
a dog taught you some nice things! It was worth while to hire such a
heathen for your tutor, as if our master had not enough of his own
people!"

I felt ashamed of myself. I turned my back to him, and said:

"Go away, Savelitch; I do not want any tea."

But it was a difficult matter to quiet Savelitch when he had set his
mind upon preaching a sermon.

"You see now, Peter Andreitch, what it is to get drunk. You have a
headache, and you do not want to eat or drink anything. A man who gets
drunk is good for nothing. Have some cucumber pickle with honey; or
perhaps half a glass of fruit wine would be better still. What do you
say?"

At that moment a boy entered the room and handed me a note from Zourin.
I opened it and read the following lines:

    "DEAR PETER ANDREIVITCH,

    "Be so good as to send me, by my boy, the hundred roubles which you
    lost to me yesterday. I am in great need of money.

    "Yours faithfully,

    "IVAN ZOURIN."

There was no help for it. I assumed an air of indifference, and
turning to Savelitch, who was my treasurer and caretaker in one, I
ordered him to give the boy a hundred roubles.

"What? why?" asked the astonished Savelitch.

"I owe them to him," I replied, with the greatest possible coolness.

"Owe!" ejaculated Savelitch, becoming more and more astonished.
"When did you get into his debt? It looks a very suspicious piece of
business. You may do as you like, my lord, but I shall not give the
money."

I thought that, if in this decisive moment I did not gain the upper
hand of the obstinate old man, it would be difficult for me to liberate
myself from his tutelage later on; so, looking haughtily at him, I said:

"I am your master, and you are my servant. The money is mine. I played
and lost it because I chose to do so; and I advise you not to oppose my
wishes, but to do what you are ordered."

Savelitch was so astounded at my words, that he clasped his hands and
stood as if petrified.

"What are you standing there like that for?" I exclaimed angrily.

Savelitch began to weep.

"Father, Peter Andreitch," he stammered in a quivering voice, "do not
break my heart with grief. You are the light of my life, so listen to
me--to an old man: write to this robber, and tell him that you were
only joking, that we have not got so much money. A hundred roubles!
Merciful Heaven! Tell him that your parents have strictly forbidden you
to play for anything except nuts----"

"That will do; let me have no more of your chatter! Give me the money,
or I will put you out by the neck!"

Savelitch looked at me with deep sadness, and went for the money. I
pitied the poor old man; but I wanted to assert my independence and to
show that I was no longer a child.

The money was paid to Zourin. Savelitch hastened to get me away from
the accursed inn. He made his appearance with the information that the
horses were ready. With an uneasy conscience, and a silent feeling
of remorse, I left Simbirsk without taking leave of my teacher of
billiards, and without thinking that I should ever see him again.


[Footnote 1: A celebrated German general who entered the service of
Russia during the reign of Peter the Great.]

[Footnote 2: _Outchitel._ A tutor.]

[Footnote 3: Avdotia, daughter of Basil.]

[Footnote 4: Diminutive of Peter.]

[Footnote 5: Anastasia, daughter of Gerasim.]

[Footnote 6: The Russians usually address each other by their Christian
name and that of their father. Thus Andrei Petrovitch means simply
Andrew, son of Peter.]

[Footnote 7: The rouble, at that time, was worth about three shillings
and four-pence.]

[Footnote 8: Diminutive of Arina.]

[Footnote 9: Peter, son of Andrew.]

[Footnote 10: A sour but refreshing drink made from rye-meal and malt.]

[Footnote 11: Brandy.]



CHAPTER II.


THE GUIDE.


My reflections during the journey were not very agreeable. My loss,
according to the value of money at that time, was of no little
importance. I could not but confess, within my own mind, that my
behaviour at the Simbirsk inn was very stupid, and I felt guilty in
the presence of Savelitch.' All this tormented me. The old man sat in
gloomy silence upon the seat of the vehicle, with his face averted
from me, and every now and then giving vent to a sigh. I wanted at all
hazards to become reconciled to him, but I did not know how to begin.
At last I said to him:

"Come, come, Savelitch, that will do, let us be friends. I was to
blame; I see myself that I was in the wrong. I acted very foolishly
yesterday, and I offended you without cause. I promise that I will act
more wisely for the future, and listen to your advice. Come, don't be
angry, but let us be friends again."

"Ah! father, Peter Andreitch," he replied, with a deep sigh, "I am
angry with myself; I alone am to blame. How could I leave you alone in
the inn! But what else could be expected? We are led astray by sin. The
thought came into my mind to go and see the clerk's wife, who is my
gossip.[1] But so it was: I went to my gossip, and ill-luck came of
it. Was there ever such a misfortune! How shall I ever be able to look
in the face of my master and mistress? What will they say when they
know that their child is a drunkard and a gambler?"

In order to console poor Savelitch, I gave him my word that I would
never again spend a single copeck[2] without his consent. He calmed
down by degrees, although every now and again he still continued
muttering, with a shake of the head, "A hundred roubles! It's no
laughing matter!"

I was nearing the place of my destination. On every side of me extended
a dreary-looking plain, intersected by hills and ravines. Everything
was covered with snow. The sun was setting. The _kibitka_[3] was
proceeding along the narrow road, or, to speak more precisely, along
the track made by the peasants' sledges Suddenly the driver began
gazing intently about him, and at last, taking off his cap, he turned
to me and said:

"My lord, will you not give orders to turn back?"

"Why?"

"The weather does not look very promising: the wind is beginning to
rise; see how it whirls the freshly fallen snow along."

"What does that matter?"

"And do you see that yonder?"

And the driver pointed with his whip towards the east.

"I see nothing, except the white steppe and the clear sky."

"There--away in the distance: that cloud."

I perceived, indeed, on the edge of the horizon, a white cloud, which I
had taken at first for a distant hill. The driver explained to me that
this small cloud presaged a snowstorm.

I had heard of the snowstorms of that part of the country, and I knew
that whole trains of waggons were frequently buried in the drifts.
Savelitch was of the same opinion as the driver, and advised that we
should return. But the wind did not seem to me to be very strong: I
hoped to be able to reach the next station in good time, and I gave
orders to drive on faster.

The driver urged on the horses at a gallop, but he still continued
to gaze towards the east. The horses entered into their work with a
will. In the meantime the wind had gradually increased in violence.
The little cloud had changed into a large, white, nebulous mass, which
rose heavily, and gradually began to extend over the whole sky. A fine
snow began to fall, and then all at once this gave place to large heavy
flakes. The wind roared; the snowstorm had burst upon us. In one moment
the dark sky became confounded with the sea of snow; everything had
disappeared.

"Well, my lord," cried the driver, "this is a misfortune; it is a
regular snowstorm!"

I looked out of the _kibitka;_ all was storm and darkness. The wind
blew with such terrific violence that it seemed as if it were endowed
with life. Savelitch and I were covered with snow: the horses ploughed
their way onward at a walking pace, and soon came to a standstill.

"Why don't you go on?" I called out impatiently to the driver.

"But where am I to drive to?" he replied, jumping down from his seat;
"I haven't the slightest idea as to where we are; there is no road, and
it is dark all round."

I began to scold him. Savelitch took his part.

"You ought to have taken his advice," he said angrily. "You should have
returned to the posting-house; you could have had some tea and could
have slept there till the morning; the storm would have blown over by
that time, and then you could have proceeded on your journey. And why
such haste? It would be all very well if we were going to a wedding!"

Savelitch was right. But what was to be done? The snow still continued
to fall. A drift began to form around the _kibitka._ The horses stood
with dejected heads, and every now and then a shudder shook their
frames. The driver kept walking round them, and, being unable to do
anything else, busied himself with adjusting the harness. Savelitch
grumbled. I looked round on every side, hoping to discover some sign of
a house or a road, but I could distinguish nothing except the confused
whirling snowdrifts Suddenly I caught sight of something black.

"Hillo! driver," I cried; "look! what is that black object yonder?"

The driver looked carefully in the direction indicated.

"God knows, my lord," said he, seating himself in his place again; "it
is neither a sledge nor a tree, and it seems to move. It must be either
a man or a wolf."

I ordered him to drive towards the unknown object, which was gradually
drawing nearer to us. In about two minutes we came up to it and
discovered it to be a man.

"Hi! my good man," cried the driver to him; "say, do you know where the
road is?"

"The road is here; I am standing on a firm track," replied the
wayfarer. "But what of it?"

"Listen, peasant," said I to him; "do you know this country? Can you
lead me to a place where I can obtain a night's lodging?"

"I know the country very well," replied the peasant. "Heaven be
thanked, I have crossed it and re-crossed it in every direction. But
you see what sort of weather it is: it would be very easy to miss the
road. You had much better stay here and wait; perhaps the storm will
blow over, and the sky become clear, then we shall be able to find the
road by the help of the stars."

His cool indifference encouraged me. I had already resolved to abandon
myself to the will of God and to pass the night upon the steppe, when
suddenly the peasant mounted to the seat of our vehicle and said to the
driver:

"Thank Heaven, there is a house not far off; turn to the right and go
straight on."

"Why should I go to the right?" asked the driver in a dissatisfied
tone. "Where do you see a road? I am not the owner of these horses that
I should use the whip without mercy."

The driver seemed to me to be in the right.

"In truth," said I, "why do you think that there is a house not far
off?"

"Because the wind blows from that direction," replied the wayfarer,
"and I can smell smoke; that is a sign that there is a village close at
hand."

His sagacity and nicety of smell astonished me. I ordered the driver to
go on. The horses moved heavily through the deep snow. The _kibitka_
advanced very slowly, at one moment mounting to the summit of a ridge,
at another sinking into a deep hollow, now rolling to one side, and now
to the other. It was very much like being in a ship on a stormy sea.
Savelitch sighed and groaned, and continually jostled against me. I let
down the cover of the _kibitka_, wrapped myself up in my cloak, and
fell into a slumber, lulled by the music of the storm, and rocked by
the motion of the vehicle.

I had a dream which I shall never forget, and in which I still see
something prophetic when I compare it with the strange events of my
life. The reader will excuse me for mentioning the matter, for probably
he knows from experience that man is naturally given to superstition
in spite of the great contempt entertained for it.

I was in that condition of mind when reality and imagination become
confused in the vague sensations attending the first stage of
drowsiness. It seemed to me that the storm still continued, and that
we were still wandering about the wilderness of snow.... All at once I
caught sight of a gate, and we entered the courtyard of our mansion. My
first thought was a fear that my father would be angry with me for my
involuntary return to the paternal roof, and would regard it as an act
of intentional disobedience. With a feeling of uneasiness I sprang out
of the _kibitka_, and saw my mother coming down the steps to meet me,
with a look of deep affliction upon her face.

"Hush!" she said to me; "your father is on the point of death, and
wishes to take leave of you."

Struck with awe, I followed her into the bedroom. I looked about me;
the room was dimly lighted, and round the bed stood several persons
with sorrow-stricken countenances. I approached very gently; my mother
raised the curtain and said:

"Andrei Petrovitch, Petrousha has arrived; he has returned because he
heard of your illness; give him your blessing."

I knelt down and fixed my eyes upon the face of the sick man. But
what did I see?... Instead of my father, I saw lying in the bed a
black-bearded peasant, who looked at me with an expression of gaiety
upon his countenance. Greatly perplexed, I turned round to my mother
and said to her:

"What does all this mean? This is not my father. Why should I ask this
peasant for his blessing?"

"It is all the same, Petrousha," replied my mother; "he is your
stepfather; kiss his hand and let him bless you." I would not consent
to it. Then the peasant sprang out of bed, grasped the axe which hung
at his back,[4] and commenced flourishing it about on every side. I
wanted to run away, but I could not; the room began to get filled with
dead bodies; I kept stumbling against them, and my feet continually
slipped in pools of blood. The dreadful peasant called out to me in a
gentle voice, saying:

"Do not be afraid; come and receive my blessing." Terror and doubt took
possession of me.... At that moment I awoke; the horses had come to a
standstill. Savelitch took hold of my hand, saying:

"Get out, my lord, we have arrived."

"Where are we?" I asked, rubbing my eyes.

"At a place of refuge. God came to our help and conducted us straight
to the fence of the house. Get out as quickly as you can, my lord, and
warm yourself."

I stepped out of the _kibitka._ The storm still raged, although with
less violence than at first. It was as dark as if we were totally
blind. The host met us at the door, holding a lantern under the skirt
of his coat, and conducted me into a room, small, but tolerably clean.
It was lit up by a pine torch. On the wall hung a long rifle, and a
tall Cossack cap.

The host, a Yaikian Cossack by birth, was a peasant of about sixty
years of age, still hale and strong. Savelitch brought in the
tea-chest, and asked for a fire in order to prepare some tea, which I
seemed to need at that moment more than at any other time in my life.
The host hastened to attend to the matter.

"Where is the guide?" I said to Savelitch.

"Here, your Excellency," replied a voice from above.

I glanced up at the loft, and saw a black beard and two sparkling eyes.

"Well, friend, are you cold?"

"How could I be otherwise than cold in only a thin tunic! I had a fur
coat, but why should I hide my fault?--I pawned it yesterday with a
brandy-seller; the cold did not seem to be so severe."

At that moment the host entered with a smoking tea-urn; I offered our
guide a cup of tea; the peasant came down from the loft. His exterior
seemed to me somewhat remarkable. He was about forty years of age, of
middle height, thin and broad-shouldered. In his black beard streaks
of grey were beginning to make their appearance; his large, lively
black eyes were incessantly on the roll. His face had something rather
agreeable about it, although an expression of vindictiveness could also
be detected upon it. His hair was cut close round his head. He was
dressed in a ragged tunic and Tartar trousers. I gave him a cup of tea;
he tasted it, and made a wry face.

"Your Excellency," said he, "be so good as to order a glass of wine for
me; tea is not the drink for us Cossacks."

I willingly complied with his request. The landlord brought a square
bottle and a glass from a cupboard, went up to him, and, looking into
his face, said:

"Oh! you are again in our neighbourhood! Where have you come from?"

My guide winked significantly, and made reply:

"Flying in the garden, pecking hempseed; the old woman threw a stone,
but it missed its aim. And how is it with--you?"

"How is it with us?" replied the landlord, continuing the allegorical
conversation, "they were beginning to ring the vespers, but the pope's
wife would not allow it: the pope is on a visit, and the devils are in
the glebe."

"Hold your tongue, uncle," replied my rover; "when there is rain,
there will be mushrooms; and when there are mushrooms, there will be
a pannier; but now" (and here he winked again) "put your axe behind
your back; the ranger is going about. Your Excellency, I drink to your
health!"

With these words he took hold of the glass, made the sign of the
cross, and drank off the liquor in one draught; then, bowing to me, he
returned to the loft.

At that time I could not understand anything of this thieves' slang,
but afterwards I understood that it referred to the Yaikian army, which
had only just then been reduced to submission after the revolt of 1772.
Savelitch listened with a look of great dissatisfaction. He glanced
very suspiciously, first at the landlord, then at the guide. The inn,
or _umet_, as it was called in those parts, was situated in the middle
of the steppe, far from every habitation or village, and had very much
the appearance of a rendezvous for thieves. But there was no help for
it. We could not think of continuing our journey. The uneasiness of
Savelitch afforded me very great amusement. In the meantime I made all
necessary arrangements for passing the night comfortably, and then
stretched myself upon a bench. Savelitch resolved to avail himself of
the stove[5]; our host lay down upon the floor. Soon all in the house
were snoring, and I fell into a sleep as sound as that of the grave.

When I awoke on the following morning, at a somewhat late hour, I
perceived that the storm was over. The sun was shining. The snow lay
like a dazzling shroud over the boundless steppe. The horses were
harnessed. I paid the reckoning to the host, the sum asked of us being
so very moderate that even Savelitch did not dispute the matter and
commence to haggle about the payment as was his usual custom; moreover,
his suspicions of the previous evening had completely vanished from
his mind. I called for our guide, thanked him for the assistance he had
rendered us, and ordered Savelitch to give him half a rouble for brandy.

Savelitch frowned.

"Half a rouble for brandy?" said he; "why so? Because you were pleased
to bring him with you to this inn? With your leave, my lord, but we
have not too many half roubles to spare. If we give money for brandy
to everybody we have to deal with, we shall very soon have to starve
ourselves."

I could not argue with Savelitch. According to my own promise, the
disposal of my money was to be left entirely to his discretion. But I
felt rather vexed that I was not able to show my gratitude to a man
who, if he had not rescued me from certain destruction, had at least
delivered me from a very disagreeable position.

"Well," said I, coldly, "if you will not give him half a rouble, give
him something out of my wardrobe; he is too thinly clad. Give him my
hare-skin pelisse."

"In the name of Heaven, father, Peter Andreitch!" said Savelitch, "why
give him your pelisse? The dog will sell it for drink at the first
tavern that he comes to."

"It is no business of yours, old man," said my stroller, "whether I
sell it for drink or not. His Excellency is pleased to give me a cloak
from off his own shoulders; it is his lordly will, and it is your duty,
as servant, to obey, and not to dispute."

"Have you no fear of God, you robber!" said Savelitch, in an angry
tone. "You see that the child has not yet reached the age of
discretion, and yet you are only too glad to take advantage of his
good-nature, and rob him. What do you want with my master's pelisse?
You will not be able to stretch it across your accursed shoulders."

"I beg of you not to show off your wit," I said to my guardian. "Bring
the pelisse hither immediately!"

"Gracious Lord!" groaned Savelitch, "the pelisse is almost brand-new!
If it were to anybody deserving of it, it would be different, but to
give it to a ragged drunkard!"

However, the pelisse was brought. The peasant instantly commenced to
try it on. And, indeed, the garment, which I had grown out of, and
which was rather tight for me, was a great deal too small for him. But
he contrived to get it on somehow, though not without bursting the
seams in the effort. Savelitch very nearly gave vent to a groan when
he heard the stitches giving way. The stroller was exceedingly pleased
with my present. He conducted me to the _kibitka_, and said, with a low
bow:

"Many thanks, your Excellency! May God reward you for your virtue. I
shall never forget your kindness."

He went his way, and I set out again on my journey, without paying any
attention to Savelitch, and I soon forgot all about the storm of the
previous day, the guide, and my pelisse.

On arriving at Orenburg, I immediately presented myself to the general.
He was a tall man, but somewhat bent with age. His long hair was
perfectly white. His old faded uniform recalled to mind the warrior of
the time of the Empress Anne, and he spoke with a strong German accent.

I gave him the letter from my father. On hearing the name, he glanced
at me quickly.

"_Mein Gott!_" said he, "it does not seem so very long ago since Andrei
Petrovitch was your age, and now what a fine young fellow he has got
for a son! _Ach_! time, time!"

He opened the letter and began to read it half aloud, making his own
observations upon it in the course of his reading.

"'Esteemed Sir, Ivan Karlovitch, I hope that your Excellency'--Why
all this ceremony? Pshaw! Isn't he ashamed of himself? To be sure,
discipline before everything, but is that the way to write to an old
comrade?--'Your Excellency has not forgotten'--Hm!--'and--when--with
the late Field Marshal Mün--in the campaign--also Caroline'--Ha,
brother! he still remembers our old pranks, then?--'Now to
business.--I send you my young hopeful'--Hm!--'Hold him with hedgehog
mittens.'--What are hedgehog mittens? That must be a Russian
proverb.--What does 'hold him with hedgehog mittens' mean?" he
repeated, turning to me.

"It means," I replied, looking as innocent as I possibly could, "to
treat a person kindly, not to be too severe, and to allow as much
liberty as possible."

"Hm! I understand--'And do not give him too much liberty.'--No, it is
evident that 'hedgehog mittens' does not mean that.--'Enclosed you
will find his passport.'--Where is it then? Ah! here it is.--'Enrol
him in the Semenovsky Regiment.'--Very well, very well, everything
shall be attended to.--'Allow me without ceremony to embrace you as an
old comrade and friend.'--Ah! at last he has got to it.--'Etcetera,
etcetera.'--'Well, my little father,' said he, finishing the reading of
the letter, and putting my passport on one side, 'everything shall be
arranged; you shall be an officer in the Regiment, and so that you may
lose no time, start to-morrow for the fortress of Bailogorsk, where you
will be under the command of Captain Mironoff, a good and honest man.
There you will learn real service, and be taught what real discipline
is. Orenburg is not the place for you, there is nothing for you to do
there; amusements are injurious to a young man. Favour me with your
company at dinner to-day."

"This is getting worse and worse," I thought to myself. "Of what use
will it be to me to have been a sergeant in the Guards almost from my
mother's womb! Whither has it led me? To the Regiment, and to a dreary
fortress on the borders of the Kirghis-Kaisaks steppes!"

I dined with Andrei Karlovitch, in company with his old adjutant. A
strict German economy ruled his table, and I believe that the fear of
being obliged to entertain an additional guest now and again was partly
the cause of my being so promptly banished to the garrison.

The next day I took leave of the general, and set out for the place of
my destination.


[Footnote 1: Savelitch uses the word here in its old meaning of
fellow-sponsor.]

[Footnote 2: A tenth of a penny.]

[Footnote 3: A kind of rough travelling cart.]

[Footnote 4: The Russian peasant usually carries his axe behind him.]

[Footnote 5: The usual sleeping place of the Russian peasant.]

